My crew is together and went down to a meeting. Are we ready to go? Yeah. Okay,
the tape is rolling. Good. First thing I wanted to ask you, Mr. Bradbury, back
in Los Angeles when you connected with that science fiction group that I've read
about, the group with Williamson and Heinlein and so forth, how did you get
involved with them, and what kind of influence do they have on you, if any?
Well, Bruce Yerke, who was the secretary for the Science Fantasy Society, He
wrote me a letter in October of 1937. That was my last year in high school. He
invited me to come down to Clifton's Cafeteria and meet the group. And I was
very shy and a little fearful. I didn't know anyone. But nevertheless, I got my
courage together and went down to a meeting. And that was my first encounter
with Forrest Ackerman, who became my first editor. He was editing a magazine
called Imagination. And then along over the next year or so, I met Henry Kupner,
Arthur Barnes, Lee Brackett, Robert Heinlein, Jack Williamson, Ross Rockland,
Henry Hasse. They all became friends and, in one way or another, influenced me.
We were very close. And I was beginning to write a lot of very bad science
fiction, very bad fantasy. I still haven't learned to write well. But these
people were very patient with me. and especially I remember Robert Heinlein and
his wonderful wife who invited me up to their home on occasion. I got to read a
lot of his manuscripts before they were published. He was just starting to
write. He came to a meeting at the Science Fantasy Club in, I believe it was 19,
early 38 or 39. He had just written his first story and sold it to Astounding
Science Fiction. So he was a beginner, just as I was, except he was about 11
years older. He was around, I would say, 31, and I think I was 19 when I met
him. So it was that kind of situation where you had personal contact with
writers who were already established or were establishing themselves. And, of
course, it changed my life forever because I had acceptance. people were willing
to put up with me and read my terrible stories. You are a self-taught writer,
though, are you not? Well, I guess you can say that. Most writing, almost every
art form, is self-teaching, except what you need around the edges is shortcuts.
If people can help you by recommending certain books, either books on writing or
books which give you examples of excellent writing. I remember Henry Kuttner was
always calling Lee Brackett up or calling me up and saying, hey, have you read
Catherine Anne Porter? You know the work of John Collier. What about Eudora
Welty? Well, this kind of shortcut is so important that you break away from your
own field and move on out into the wide culture and bring back into the science
fiction and the fantasy field influences from people like Kipling or Somerset
Maugham or John Collier. So that's where having a good teacher is important. Not
that they teach you all that much or that intensely, but the fact that they care
about you at all is very good for your sense of malnutrition. We all feel as if
we haven't fed ourselves well enough when we're that age. Okay, give us about a
second. David has to make a change on the line. Okay, we did it. Right. Okay,
listen, I'm sure you've answered this question many times before, but I think I
know what your answer is. But you've obviously been accepted by the so-called
mainstream audience, and you've sort of broken out of the area of science
fiction where you're typed as a specific kind of writer. How did you make that
switch? Well, you just automatically think about it for a lifetime. I always
dreamt of being, number one, a writer, not a writer of science fiction or a
writer of fantasy, but a writer period. I had huge heroes that I looked up to in
the world, people like Shakespeare and a lot of the great poets, Emily Dickinson
and Robert Frost when I was in my teens. And then as I got older and began to
see the world of the theater around me more, I wanted to do theater work. I
loved motion pictures. I knew that eventually I wanted to do some films. So my
interests were always very Catholic, very broad, and it was only a matter of
time before I would experiment with each of these things. And at the same time,
I was writing and heading my first success of selling stories to Weird Tales. I
was beginning to write short stories in the larger field, stories about racial
relationships or stories about travel inside America, a little bit of everything
I was experimenting with. But it took me until I was around 25 and a friend of
mine called me on the phone, said he was going to Mexico to travel for two
months, did I want to come along? Well, I said, I can't, I don't have any money.
I was still only making around $20 a week selling stories to weird tales. I
usually sold six stories to weird tales every year, which gave me around $120
for the whole year. And then I sold an occasional murder mystery and a few
science fiction stories. So my income at the time was around $2,500 a year if I
was lucky. And he said, oh, you're such a coward. He said, here, the war is
over. War has been over in Europe a month or so. You should travel, and you're
afraid to send out your short stories. You're afraid of being rejected. I know
you've got a lot of excellent broad literary, middle-stream fictions. Why don't
you retype them and send them out? So, by God, he egged me on, and I got three
short stories out of my files. I retyped them, put an assumed name on each one,
William Elliott. I mailed them off without an agent, without any representation,
with not even a letter from myself to the editors. One story to Charm, one story
to Mademoiselle, and another one to Collier's. All three stories sold within
three days of each other. One story sold on August 19th to Charm, on the 20th
one to Mademoiselle, And on my birthday, the 22nd of August, I sold my first
short story to Collier's. So all of a sudden, I had an aggregate of $1,000,
which arrived in the mail. Well, $1,000 back in 1945 would be like getting $15
,000 in the mail today. I was out of my head. I couldn't believe it. So with
that money, I picked up and went to Mexico with him for six weeks, where I had a
whole series of adventures that scared the hell out of me, and caused me to
write some of my best weird stories when I came home. So that's the way I made
the transition, because someone called me a coward and dared me to send my
stories out. Okay, fine. In much of your work, I've read interviews that you
have given to people, too, and I've heard you say this, and I pick it up from
your work, too, that oftentimes you seem to have a mistrust, maybe, of
technology and the intellect. And I wondered how you can be so committed to the
space program Well, that's a misinterpretation. It's never been true. I've never
mistrusted technologies. Only people. It's a big difference there. It's the way
we use the automobile, for instance. There's nothing wrong with cars that having
more safe drivers won't change. If I had my way, I would pass a lot of miles to
eliminate every male driver in the country because it's mainly men who do all
the killing and it's men who raise the insurance rate, especially young men
between the ages of 18 and 22. They're the real killers. So if we pass laws
eliminating all young men drivers from our society, we could save 30,000 or 40
,000 lives a year. Let the girls do the driving. Let the women do it because
they're calmer, they're quieter, they're not maniacal, they're not trying to
prove anything. So what I'm afraid of is people in specific areas. Now, when it
comes to computers, space travel, IBM's electric typewriters, these are all
beautiful. We're using them well, and the future is very exciting because of it.
Now, I've tried to pick those technologies that I criticized. For instance,
there was a certain moment in history in Los Angeles where they were threatening
to put Muzak with advertising on our buses. and I immediately mounted a campaign
with some friends, thousands of people who said, oh no you don't bad enough we
have all these posters all over the place but to trap us on buses then make us
listen to music we don't want to hear or advertisements we don't want to hear so
I'm anti the way that particular technology was going to be used and I'm anti
intellect when intellectual, when it gets in the way of creativity. People who
pretend to be intelligent at times try to tell me, a creator in a certain field,
how to create. Well, those intellectuals are dangerous then because they're
telling me my business and I know it better than they do. So I'm not afraid of
intellectuals when they behave. It's only when they get some mad idea in their
head and become insane with the idea where they become a danger. Okay, good. I
know you've been involved in various aspects of the space program before,
committees and all sorts of things. Do you have any involvements right now that
you're connected with? Yeah, I'm trying to build a space museum here in Los
Angeles, and various other groups are building similar things. So somewhere
along the line I'm going to help, or I'm going to lead, or I'm going to do
something. I want to, I've been working with the Smithsonian Institution in
Washington on a couple of projects. One, I hope to write a program, a special
entertaining program for the planetarium there, the National Air and Space
Museum. I don't know if that's ever going to come off or not. I've done one
preliminary sketch for them. I've been working off and on with the planetarium
in Los Angeles. I'd like to do more programs for them. And I'm starting work
right now on a grand opera, a science fiction grand opera for the Seattle Opera
Company based on the Moby Dick mythology. And I wrote a play several years ago
called Leviathan 99 about a great white comet coming down through the universe
once every 40 years. And this blind space captain goes out to attack the comet
that put out his eyes when he was a young astronaut. So you have the basic
mythology of Herman Melville and Moby Dick, but transferred over into the space
age with spaceships instead of whaling ships, a great white comet instead of a
great white whale. And the language, of course, of the play is mine, but the
whole thing is dedicated to the memory of Herman Melville. So I'll be working on
that. And then in several months, I'll be going down to Disney World, to the
opening of Epcot, which is a World's Fair of the future, a permanent one, which
is what Walt Disney always wanted. At the center of that permanent World's Fair,
Epcot, is the building called Spaceship Earth. And I wrote the basic scenario
for the interior of that building, a dramatization of ideas covering 100,000
years of human history. going into the deep past, coming ahead into the present
and blasting off into the future. So I have a lot of irons in the fire right
now, things that I hope will change our future all to the good. Okay, I'm going
to have to follow up on that question, on that comment about the grand opera. Is
that going to be a... Okay, you're going to adapt the opera from your play?
Yeah. Okay, is that going to be a... From the way you explain that, is that a...
A parody, a serious work? What's the tone? Serious drama.
Do you think science fiction can be translated into that sort of medium
successfully? Absolutely. After all, we've done so many things in the past. Look
at all the different kinds of science fiction films we've made. High, low,
bright, dumb, in between, you name it, all kinds of things. There's no reason
why. There is one science fiction opera in existence already, called Aniara, a
Swedish opera which premiered about 20 years ago, but it's electronic and it's
12-tone, as I recall. It's not much fun to listen to. It's pretty monotonous,
and I thought it was time for someone else to try yet another opera and see if
this time it wouldn't work. Okay, I'll sure be interested when that one comes
out. Who will I? Let me just ask one more general question of this nature.
Again, it's an obvious question, but still, it's a big one too. Why do you think
space holds such a romantic interest for mankind, space and space travel? Well,
I don't know if it's a romantic interest. I think it starts as romance and then
turns into something called survival. In other words, we don't want to stay here
on this planet Earth. This is our seatbed planet. And those of us with any sense
of the destiny of mankind, whatever that is, look to space to put our seed on
other worlds and then move us on out into the universe so that the cognition of
the universe continues so that we gain some measure of immortality. What's the
use of having Shakespeare or George Bernard Shaw or the beautiful paintings of
the world or the great films or the fantastic book, everything's going to be
lost when our world freezes or our world burns if the sun should explode. So
space travel is a very practical endeavor made by we human beings to ensure the
fact that we'll go on living for several million years. It's a very practical
exercise. Okay, that's an excellent answer. Thank you. Let me hit just a few
high points of some of your works. Does Something Wicked This Way Come? Did you
have a particular inspiration for that story, or impetus behind it? Not really.
It all started a long time ago. I wrote a short story for Weird Tales called The
Black Ferris. And I've always been in love with carnivals and circuses and
illustrated men and dwarves and things. You name it. So over the years, all this
material accumulated. And one night, about 24 years ago, Gene Kelly invited me
over to MGM Studios here to see a new film of his called Invitation to the
Dance. And part of that film is a sort of dance ballet concerned with a clown, a
carnival, the sort of material that Lon Chaney Sr. once did 60 years ago in
American film. He did a lot of films about circuses and armless,
legless performers, all kinds of grotesque that he worked with and pretended to
imitate. So I came out of the screening of Gene Kelly's film and walked home
with my wife, lamenting all the way the fact that I'd never worked for Kelly and
wanting very much to do so. So I got home and I rummaged through all my material
to find something to send to Gene Kelly, and I found The Black Fairest. And I
took several weeks to write it into a longer 70-page screen adaptation.
treatment outline, and I took it to Kelly, and he immediately said, my God, I
must direct this. Can I have an option on it? I'll take it to Europe and try to
get some money. He went to Europe for a number of weeks and months, and finally
returned and said, it's no use. Nobody wants to put up any money for this.
Thanks very much, and so long. Well, I was heartbroken because I wanted to work
for Kelly, and I said to heck with it. I sat down, and I wrote the long screen
treatment into a novel. It took me about two years. The novel was published in
the late summer of 1962, 20 years ago. Then, over the years since, I've done
four or five other versions of it as screenplays. Now, finally, at the end of
this year, the final product, the film, based on the book, based on my new
screenplay, will be out in the theaters with Jason Robards and Jonathan Pryce
from the Royal Shakespeare Theater. Do you have a hand in the actual making of
that movie? Absolutely. I did the screenplay, and now I'm helping with the
editing of the film. I'm going in and sitting with my director and with the
heads of the studio, making suggestions about certain sound effects, indicating
where I think maybe we don't have enough music or the music isn't loud enough.
These little subtle tunings of a film that occur in the last months of the
process before the film is in its final form. And so far people are listening to
me, and I must say I'm having a good relationship with the director in the
studio. They care about the project.
And I make whole pages of notes and turn them in, and now in the next few weeks
we'll finish the job. Good. Yeah, I know that was being made into a movie. We're
looking forward to that. So am I. Listen, I was going to ask one more question
on that book and some of your other stories. You often use carnival material as,
I guess, a symbol of evil or something. I wondered why you did that. I think
most of us are uncomfortable around carnivals and circuses. You sense that the
people who run them are evil people. There is something wrong with most carnival
people. The workers, it's a very tough life. It's a rough existence. And it's
run by a bunch of tramps and vagabonds and people who go from town to town. They
have no roots. And I should imagine there's a lot that goes on behind the scenes
we can't even guess at. Not that there isn't a hierarchy there. In a big circus,
of course there is. And the people at the top of the hierarchy are the trapeze
people. They are the royal family. And then you go downwards through the various
levels of performers depending on their athletic prowess. But it's a very
difficult life. It's a miracle if most of these people make it through and keep
their sanity. So when you're a child, you sense, especially in the seedy little
carnivals that come to visit your hometown, you sense the uneasiness, the sly
life, the sense of evil behind the scenes of these people. I suppose that's
where my fictions came from. Okay, let me move for just a second to the Martian
Chronicles. Did you gather those stories together after they'd all been written
and published elsewhere, or did you really aim at one volume? No, I didn't know
what I was doing. That's the best way to do things, just do them, and then wake
up some morning and discover you've got a book. I went to New York City in June
of 1949. My wife was pregnant with our first child. We had about $80 in the
bank, and I took the Greyhound bus to New York, and I took all my short stories
with me, oh, 80 or 90, 100 short stories, hoping to sell one or two collections
of stories to some publisher. Well, I had meetings with various people at Simon
& Schuster and Doubleday, and they all said, look, we don't publish short
stories. Nobody buys them. Nobody cares. And then one night I had dinner with
Walter Bradbury, He had doubleday, no relation to me. Wonderful gentleman, very
bright gentleman. And sitting there at dinner that night, he said, Ray, what
about all those Martian stories? Isn't there a novel there? Isn't there some way
of hanging them all together? It seems to me there's a common thread. I said,
oh, my God. You know, years ago, I made notes about doing a series of chronicles
and then threw the notes somewhere and forgot about them. So my subconscious
must have remembered, and along through the years, was putting these beads on a
single thread. I went back to the YMCA that night, sat in my underwear, it was a
hot, hot summer evening, terribly humid, and finished typing out an outline of a
book which I called The Martian Chronicles, which I then took to Doubleday the
next day and they promptly bought the novel plus The Illustrated Man, a
collection of stories, and I left New York City with, again, a fabulous $1,000,
$500 for each book, which, again, 35 years ago, it was a heck of a lot of money.
And it enabled me and my wife to make it through the next six or seven months
and survive over into the time when our first child was born. Okay, just one
sort of a two-part question to end this on the Martian Chronicles. I suppose
then the order of the book was your own, the order of the stories. And if it
was, why did you put The Million Year Picnic as the final story? It seemed a
proper place to put it. It seemed a culmination of all the stories. And my job
in looking at all my stories was to guess where to place each. And while some of
them it was very easy. I did a whole series of stories of first encounters on
Mars with various expeditions. So I knew those automatically had to be up front.
along with an imaginary encounter in illa where a woman dreams an invasion of
mars we never see the invasion itself of the earth men but we know that secretly
it must be there somewhere that real people got killed by the jealous husband
and then you go along through all the other encounters and what happens to mars
as a result of the invasion by earth people and ending with all of your final
Beats and a Brief Return to Earth for There Will Come Soft Rain, and then the
Million Year Picnic at the end. It all fell together in roughly two hours in my
head at the typewriter that night at the YMCA. Were you happy with the NBC
production of that book? I most certainly was not. It was one of the most boring
shows ever put on television. And it's a great shame. Obviously no one enjoyed
doing it. And the director obviously didn't enjoy it, which is a great shame,
because he should have got out of bed every morning and said, let's have a ball,
let's play, let's jump up and down and scream and yell and get something out of
this material. But he obviously didn't do that. So the whole thing is paced at a
letdown pace. The actors were not directed. Here and there, there are individual
scenes that are quite lovely. Thank God for that. There were a few high points.
I think the encounter between the priest and the Christ figure and the fire
balloons was interestingly done. And the encounter with Wilder and the Martian
late at night when they discuss time travel and who is alive and who isn't alive
and who's down in the city, I think that worked fine. But on the whole, it was
so boring it will never be repeated. You haven't heard anything about it ever
coming back, have you? No, but I might mention that two of us who do this show
teach a science fiction fantasy class here at Odessa College, and we use
snippets from that show that are quite successful pieces from it. Yeah, I taped
the show, all six hours of it, and I've never played it since. Yeah, in fact,
I've taped over most of it. But a friend of mine just arrived and he's yawning
here, an indication that he agrees with my estimate of the show. It's a great
shame, but I've had better luck this year with two television productions. With
The Electric Grandmother, with Maureen Stapleton, and Any Friend of Nicholas
Nickleby is a Friend of Mine with Fred Quinn. Those both turned out very well
indeed. Thank God. Yeah, we thought they did, too. Let me just quickly ask you a
couple on Fahrenheit 451. Was there a particular inspiration for that book, or
did it just grow? It was a combination of things. I had gotten interested with
book burners over a period of time, and when I wrote the book was the beginning
of a McCarthy era, the Joseph McCarthy period, when there was a lot of talk
about books being banned. Not many of them got banned, thank God. For a brief
moment there, I think they took a few American books off of foreign library
shelves in army libraries. And then President Eisenhower ordered them all put
back on, which proved what a bright man he was, thank goodness. But it was
during that period that I suppose my subconscious fermented on all this and
said, I've got to do a book about my anger about libraries, because libraries is
really the place where I was born and raised myself, grew up, and have lived for
a lifetime. They really are very super special to me. I go in bookstores
constantly. I can't stay away from them. I buy too many books. I'm compulsive
about it. So the novel wrote itself in nine days. I went up to UCLA in 19, this
was back in 1950, and I spent nine days there in the typing room in the basement
of the UCLA library with about 12 students sitting around me, and I played these
dime-a-half-hour typewriter machines. And I typed the novel on those dime
machines, and I spent around $9.40 typing the novel. So it's a grand place to
write a book like that, isn't it, in the basement of a library? Yeah. Do you
think we're heading in that direction at all? Well, there's a lot of rumors, but
we hear those rumors every year. and there are already some stupid librarians or
some stupid mayor or some dumb pressure group in some town somewhere in our
country every year for the last 60 years that wants to censor this or censor
that and then they blow away they're just chapped in the wind and don't pay any
attention to them and if they grow giant size call me on the phone and I'll come
over and kick them in the kishkoosh okay okay listen are you a I think I know
the answer to this, too, but are your short stories written from just
inspiration or do you have to exercise a kind of discipline on them? No, it's
all passion. It's all explosion. I get up in the morning, throw up at my
typewriter at breakfast and clean up at noon. So that's the way to write. It
makes for very sticky typewriters, but everything has to be fun. If it isn't
fun, it's not going to be any good. You get an idea and say, God, this is a
great idea. So I try to teach this to my friends and teach them just to fall in
love and go mad with ideas and get the work done. Okay. I read once where you
thought that if you weren't a writer, you may have become a preacher or
something. What did you mean by that? Well, I could shift. If I had my druthers,
I could shift gears tomorrow and become about seven things. I'd make a very good
preacher, a rabbi, a minister, a priest. I'd make a wonderful pope. I'd go out
and pontificate to the world because I care about those ideas. I'm fascinated
with the problems of theology. Or I would make a good teacher in various art
fields. I would make a good artist. I would make a fine actor. I don't know if
I'd be a brilliant one, but I'd sure have a hell of a lot of fun doing it. I'd
make a good book salesman. I can think of dozens of things that I would like to
be that I'll never have a chance to be. My loves are multitudinous and I don't
understand people who are not in love. There's so much. I'd make a good director
if I had the patience and wanted to take time. So there are about eight or nine
things that I'd be a good politician because I care about the future of cities,
in rebuilding them and changing them. I make a good architect. I do have an
education up to a point in architecture and urban planning. So all these are my
loves. Okay, excellent. How are you doing on time now? I think I should quit
now, but if you want to call me back in a week and do another half hour. Yeah,
we would. Could we make it maybe near the middle or third week in August,
something like that? Sure. You're going to be around then? Absolutely. Drop me a
note in the meantime, okay? Okay, listen, we sure appreciate your time, Mr.
Bradbury, and we will give you the tapes when they're edited, obviously, and we'll
be back to you sometime in later August. All right, swell. Okay. Bye-bye now.